Crowne Plaza Hotel in Dallas. Farmer's Branch.
Farmer's Branch. Sorry about that. Don't let the
city manager hear you say it. OK. And this is Bob
Cornish, and I'm interviewing Bill Shevlin today
of Farmer's Branch. And Bill has a rather varied
background in planning and has brought a lot of
resources to the Texas scene. Bill, would you like
to start with your planning education and
whatever your first experience was in Texas
planning?
Well, my original education was a bachelor's of
architecture from Texas A&M, and I was in the
service, and then I came back to Fort Worth and
worked in architecture, and decided that I, that
that was too limiting, and I went off to, made
application, was accepted, went off to the
University of Pennsylvania in 1961, in the fall of
61, and entered the joint program there, and was
there two years and ended up with a master's degree
in architecture and a master's degree in city
planning. And following that, immediately
following that, I came to Back to Texas, really not
knowing what I was going to do for sure, but I came to
Dallas to meet the man who had given me a fellowship
at Pennsylvania for two years. We lived in Dallas,
and he insisted that when I had lunch with him after
lunch, he insisted that he take me over to meet a
very close friend of his that he referred to as
Sprung. who turned out to be Marvin Springer. And
so he took me to Sprung's office. And I think the
conversation went something like this. Sprung,
you need somebody on your staff from the
University of Pennsylvania. Shevlin, you need to
be in Dallas working with Springer. And before the
afternoon was out, I was working for Springer. He
had not intended to hire anybody, and I had not
intended to go to work for anybody in Dallas. And I
was subsequently with Marvin for about two years
as an associate in his firm. At one time, we had
Marvin and myself as an associate, Doyle Smith as
an associate who had a background in civil
engineering, and Frank Osgood, who had a
background in economics. And he had come from
Tulsa. He had come from, he may have come from
Tulsa. I know his brother was involved in planting
up there, but he may have come from Tulsa.
It was during that period of time when I was with
Marvin, a lot of our work was centered around 701
projects, which I found, as Marvin found, was
very, very difficult to do in Texas. There was a lot
of hand-holding and not a lot of prospect for
implementation after the fact. The biggest
project I worked on with Marvin, public project
while I was with him, was the city of Galveston. We
did the comprehensive plan for the city of
Galveston during that period. And I did a lot of
work on the housing analysis and component
community facilities and all of that. And we did
work in other cities, 701 planning. He was doing
some work in Denison at that time, in Plano. And I
can't remember all the cities now. There were a
number of them. And I was not involved in all of
them. I was involved in most of them in one way or
another. Galveston was the one that I was involved
in beginning to end.
You may say anything about Marvin, my view of
Marvin. Marvin was, at that time, and I've had
occasion to work with him in a different capacity
on a couple of occasions since. One was with
respect to the Flower Mound Newtown planning,
which he represented the city of Flower Mound, and
later I worked with him when he was representing
the city of Plano, and I was working with a major
tract of land out there. But Marvin, I considered
the time spent with Marvin to be very valuable
postgraduate work, because I found him to be very
knowledgeable. I found him to be the best I've ever
met in my entire life in getting people to work
together towards some objectives which they may
not share in common. He was a great facilitator. I
say was only because he retired from active
practice. By the time he was in active practice, he
was very people-oriented, very much capable of
seeing problems freshly and dealing with them.
One of the things he used to say quite often was, I'm
not a solution walking around looking for a
problem.
His population estimates held up better. If you go
back and check them, you'll find they've held up
better than probably any, certainly any at that
time, and maybe any since because of the way he went
about doing it. And I just think he probably more
than anyone else made a major contribution to what
we consider to be planning in the state of Texas. He
was a great innovator in the area of ordinances.
Just because many, many cities in Texas have
ordinances which he prepared 20, 25 years ago that
became obsolete, it's not his fault because they
were very much on the mark at the time. It's just
that the city's never got around to revising.
Farmer's Branch is a good example, which is now
going through a comprehensive planning process
for the first time. will sometime within the next
year revise Marvin's zoning ordinance for the
first time. At any rate, Marvin made a great
contribution, and I consider it to be a real
privilege to have a chance to work with him.
Everything I learned from Marvin I've used to
advantage since. How long were you with Marvin? I
was with Marvin for about two years and left. only
because I received a phone call one day as I was at
work sitting on the drafting stool working on a
plan. And the person on the other end of the line
said, this is Don Foley. I'm head of the Department
of City Regional Planning at Berkeley. And we have
a position to fill on the staff next year. We have a
professor going on sabbatical. It was Mel Scott.
You've been recommended to us. Would you be
interested in coming to Berkeley for a year? And so
I thought about three seconds, and I said yes. And
so that's the reason I left here. You were there for
a year? I was there for a year, and I was offered
another year to stay there for another year. I was
also offered a position to go over to Berkeley and
become the city planner. I was offered a position
in Oakland, offered a position by Alan Jacobs when
he went to San Francisco to come head up urban
design in San Francisco. And I didn't. Norman Lynn
was an Oakland. Norman Lynn was an Oakland. And I
did none of those things because in the middle of my
time in California, I got married to a Dallas girl
who got homesick and wanted to come back.
Interesting change in career direction. That's
right. So that's the reason I probably ended up
back in Dallas. And
Marvin was, one of the other things that happened
when I worked with Marvin is that I immediately
became very aware of the professional
organizations and also the educational
organizations in Texas relating to planning
because Marvin was what I consider to be a
professional's professional. He was very much
behind planning education. He was It was one of the
people who had been instrumental in establishing
AIP as a professional organization and a force in
Texas, along with people like Ralph Elliford and
Bill... Who am I trying to say? No, and... John
Cunningham.
I mean, John Cunningham, not Bill. John
Cunningham. I know what Bill Cunningham... John
Cunningham. Bill Singleton out of Louisiana,
people like that. And I immediately, through
Marvin, came into contact with all these people
who were also very, very fine people. I'm trying to
establish when the chapter was created. It was
originally the Gulf Southwest chapter. It was in
existence before I came in 1961. So I would say that
it was created probably during the time that
Marvin was still planning director in Dallas, a
period which was from 1950 to 1959 sometime. So I
would say it was probably four or five years before
that day was established. Oh, it was Marvin.
By the way, Marvin is writing the history of
planning in Dallas. Is he? I would say that the time
I came to Texas in 1961 and at the time I left Texas in
1963 to go to California and at the time I came back
in 1965, left in 65, came back in 66, that nothing
had changed, that AIP as a professional
organization was relatively weak. because there
weren't enough planners with any credentials to
create any kind of critical mass and therefore any
influence. By far Marvin was the most influential
person in the state with respect to the state. He
had a tremendous
standing with state agencies in particular with
the Texas State Highway Department. So he was the
one who When it was necessary to get somebody out
front, Marvin was usually the one that was out
front. The other thing that was, I think, fair to
say is that planning education in Texas was
practically nonexistent, as we would think of it
today. And both of those things were very... The
only program at all was at UT Austin. That's right.
And it wasn't... Hugo was down there, but it wasn't
really much of a program. It was more of a... I don't
know what to say, specialty within architecture,
which is the worst place, weren't the worst place,
the only worst place in architecture, or equally
worst place to be engineering. At any rate, it just
didn't exist. And so consequently, my
involvement at that time, when I was with Marvin,
was rather limited. There was really no place here
for me to... to teach anything, and I also thought
at that time I hadn't learned enough to teach
anything, so that worked out fine. That doesn't
bother some of our current students. I
understand. But the other side of it, with respect
to AIP, I did start getting involved with AIP, and
Marvin encouraged people who worked for him to do
that, but it was... And I can't remember. I know
that the first... The first section meeting I went
to was, I think there were two people there, and
they were both wondering why they were there, and I
think Bob Mitchell was one of them, as I recall.
Maybe John Greer was the other one, but it was
pretty discouraging. At any rate, when I left and
went to Berkeley, that was a very stimulating
experience. I was there during the middle of the
free speech movement, and I went down to the to the
commons and watch Mario Savio. And I like to pride
myself in having the intelligence to be standing
in front of the administration building the day
that Carol Doda came out and did her famous act on
the balcony of the administration building.
But the students were stimulating. The
environment was stimulating. Although I did,
just as a quick aside, as I said earlier, find
myself at Berkeley in the same situation I found
myself in the U.S. and Pennsylvania a few years
earlier, right in the middle of a fight for turf
between the social policy planners and the fiscal
planners. So there was nothing dull about it.
Again, as we had at Penn when I was there, we had a
real galaxy of people, and they made a big
impression on me. However, when I came back, I must
have come back infused with a lot of energy and
enthusiasm and so forth. And let me say also
parenthetically that I have never held a position
in a public agency. I've never worked directly for
a public agency as an employee. When I came back, we
did a lot of work for agencies when I was with
Marvin. And I had a lot of dealings with public
agencies. And I was around enough so that
sometimes, particularly in a place like
Galveston, I wondered if I was on their payroll or
on Marvin's payroll. And he wondered that
sometimes, too. But, so my perspective is more
from that of an outsider who's done a lot of work
with public agencies but never within public
agencies. And when I came back, I took a position
with a firm, local firm in Dallas. At that time it
was called Harrell and Hamilton. It's now called
Omnicwine. Was that Harrell Hamilton? No, no, no.
Harrell, George Harrell and E.T. Hamilton. It's
now changed. While it was there, it changed its
name to Omniclan. And I was in charge of planning
and urban design for them. And we did a variety of
things, although none of them, with the exception
of the Dallas Convention Center, do I consider to
have been especially noteworthy. But things that
I was involved in during that period of time.
However, when I did come back, I really found
myself thrown into the middle of AIP. AIA
nationally, AIP nationally, AIP locally. Also,
when I came back, I was asked upon my return by TCU to
start a course on urban design in their urban
studies program, which I did. I did, and I used to
commute. For about a year, I commuted several
nights a week after work to TCU to teach that
course, and I finally gave it up after a year
because I knew it was just too hard. I just couldn't
do it. and didn't want to do it, I should put it that
way, because there were a lot of demands on time
otherwise. Is that an animal? What? TCU in Fort
Worth. In Fort Worth. But it was a long drive after a
day's work. But I did set that program up for them,
and I understand it did continue for a few years
after that, other people teaching it. When I got
back, I did get very much involved at a, local
level, at state level, and national level in AIP.
And I got involved at a local level, not so much at
the state level, but at a national level in AIA. I
became section director of the,
it was called the Dallas-Fort Worth section
originally, as I recall. And one of the things, I
did a couple of things. One of them was I got the name
change to North Central Texas section. The other
thing I did was to, I realized soon after I got into
the organization, it was one of the reasons why I
wanted to become section director, there were no
bylaws. And one reason why there were no bylaws is
that the chapter had no bylaws. So I wrote the
original bylaws myself. I wrote them for the North
Central Texas section. Those bylaws, because
they were the only ones that existed among all the
sections of the chapter, for that matter, ended up
being the ones that were used as a model to
construct the first chapter bylaws.
So then we started working on trying to execute. By
that time, more climbers were coming into Texas.
The 701 programs were dissipating, winding down.
Towns were growing to a size where they could
afford to hire planners. The population growth in
Texas had gotten to that point.
The whole thing was getting better in terms of an
environment. However, there was a lot of friction
between the planners and the engineers, for
example. And not at that time to a great extent with
the architects, but with the engineers with
respect to who was going to do planning. And he was
qualified to do planning. And that was a major
issue at the time. I think Mary Lou Henry was
involved in that situation with the engineers.
Yes, she was. And I was involved in it to some
extent. One of the things I was involved with also
at that period of time was helping to get the state
AIP in a stronger position with respect to state
legislation affecting planners, planning and
planners. with respect to the way in which the
state viewed the role of cities, municipalities,
in having some responsibility toward planning,
which at that time they didn't, you know, the old
thing, the old problem of zoning as a substitute
for planning was rampant in Texas as it is still
largely today.
During, in the, around the mid-60s, or just after I
got back, around 67, 68, 69, in that period, I was
involved with, well, I was involved with AIP. I was
chairman for three years of the national, AIP
National Urban Design Committee. We had lots of
real luminaries on that committee, and I was
fortunate to be able to get them to come to
meetings. We had about six meetings a year, and I
could get about a 95% participation. They paid
their own way. from real, really first-class,
well-known people, because by that time, urban
design was becoming a topic which was widely
discussed and written about, and people were
interested in pushing it along who were involved
in it. Of course, you had local here. You had
Wyoming Lou. Well, that was later. That was later.
That came later, and I'll tell that story about how
we got Waymang, too, if you'd like to know that.
because it's all tied in together. I
was also the one that got finally, I said, this is
nuts. When the AIP started establishing
technical departments, I said, let's convert
this to a technical department. And I went to the
board and said, we want to convert this to a
technical department. And they said they had two,
I think, at that time. One might have been regional
planning, but I can't remember at this point. They
said, well, We just barely got the other two
established with enough petition signatures.
And you'll never get urban design to be
established as technical department. There's
not enough interest. But at any rate, we went ahead
and promoted it and petitioned it. And when we
submitted it to the board, and I remember that day I
took it in there, and Paul Davidoff almost fell out
of his chair and was on the board at that time.
Because I said, well, we've done it, and we have
twice as many signatures we need to petition this
into a technical department, and considerably
more than the other two. So that got accomplished.
I was also involved. I can't remember exactly when
it happened, but I was involved in promoting the
idea of the urban joint program between AIP and
AIA, Urban Design Assistance Team. And I think I
went on the third one, Second or third one they did,
which was in Linden, Massachusetts. And I worked a
great deal in trying to get that program and knit it
together and keeping it going between the two
parties. It's mostly architecture now, isn't it?
I don't know. I've been so out of touch with it for so
long. Let me say, it was originally conceived by
the AIA. And I, along with a few other people, were
the ones who pushed the AIP into it and sort of
insisted that it be a joint program. So I'm sure
that's continued. Well, I'm sure it hadn't
continued, particularly since we changed to the
APA concept. I don't think there's been enough,
which I was not in favor of. There's not enough glue
there to make it stick. At any rate, you asked about
Wei Ming Wu. Interesting, I'll tell you the story
about that, the history of that, if you want to know
how he got here. From Minneapolis, where he was
from. Yeah, he came from Minneapolis, where he was
from. One of the things that happened when I came
back from Berkeley is I looked around and I said,
hey, there's no urban design. The city of Dallas
has no urban design, anything. And they barely had
a comprehensive planning program. So Alden Deal
was the planning director at that time. How do you
spell his last name? D-E-Y-O. He worked under
Marvin, and he was the planning director. And
Alden had a very, in my opinion, and I used to tell
him this, fairly narrow idea of what
comprehensive planning was. And Alden and I spent
a lot of time talking about urban design and why
urban design should be in the program. After about
a year and a half, it happened that there was a
reorganization of the planning department,
which Alden initiated. And we managed to get urban
design. I managed to convince him that urban
design should be a confluent. Originally, it was
going to be a committee or sort of like a minor
function within the long range planning aspect of
the plan. And I argued with him and then later, a
little bit later, with Jim Schroeder, who was very
sympathetic, and with George Schroeder, who was
the city manager at that time, that it should be a
full-fledged division. Was it Schroeder who was a
landscape architect? He may have been. I don't
know Jim's background. From A&M. He could have
been. I don't know Jim's background. At any rate,
we got it established on paper. And then I said, oh,
my God, it's on paper, but they don't have a staff.
How are they going to get a staff? Because there
weren't very many people around, and they
wouldn't want to pay very much money at that
initial and so forth. So one day I went down to...
George, I mean, to Jim Schroeder's office, and I
said, Jim, I got an idea. He said, what is it? I said,
look, you've got an urban design division
established on paper, but you don't have it
staffed, and you don't have really enough funds to
staff it right now. If we don't do something with
it, it's going to die. It's going to just wither,
and it won't be there anymore, or it'll be lost in
the shop, or it'll be relegated back to what it
shouldn't have been in the first place. He said,
what do you propose? And I said, well, What I think
we should do is set up a temporary committee or
preferably a task force, because I see it having a
short life, to help advise the planning
department during this period on urban design and
to help it find the person to head up the department
for this division, I should say. He says, find with
me if you can get George Schrader to agree with it.
So I said, let me have your phone, and I called
George Schrader upstairs. He was assistant city
manager at that time. I said, I'd like to come up and
talk to you. He said, fine. So I went up and I made a
proposal to him. He said, I think that's a great
idea. How do you think we should do it? And I said,
well, it seems to me that you really need to ask one
of the professional organizations to set it up
rather than trying to do it yourself. Because I
said two things. That's one. Second thing is it
should report to the city manager, not to the
planning department. It should be an advisory
group. Because among other things, it needs to
have independence. And number two, you need to be
able to kick it out when the time comes. So he said,
OK, who do you suggest? I said, well, I'd like to
suggest AIP, but they're not strong enough to do it
at this point. I said, so I think what should happen
is you should ask AIA to do it, just strong enough to
do it, but with some conditions that AIP and ASLA
need to be involved in it directly. put together
the committee. So that letter was issued, written
by George Schroeder and signed by Scott McDonald,
the city manager at that time, inviting the AIA to
set up this new function, which I suggested to
George be called the Urban Design Task Force. And
it did come into existence. I am dismayed to say
it's still in existence. It should have gone out of
existence a long time ago. It's now become... a
professional country club, one of those things
you need to have your name on. At any rate, we then
set about finding somebody to head up this thing,
and we were asked to talk to different people, and
it happened that along about this time there was a
national AIP conference, a convention in
Minneapolis, and Jim Schroeder asked me along
with a couple of other people, while we were out
there to talk with Wei Ming Wu, who was being
considered, and see if we felt he would be a good
person to employ as the head of the urban design
division, and if so, to help the city convince him
that he should come here. And we did, in fact, meet
with Wei Ming, and we did, in fact... do a lot of
talking with him. And I think Wayming has said on a
number of occasions that one of the main reasons he
made the decision to come was because the city did
have the Urban Design Task Force. And he was
impressed with the amount of support it had. And he
felt that he could get the support out of the
community and the professional organizations to
allow him to do the job. So that's the story of how
Wayming Lou got to Dallas. And he was here for quite
a few years. About six or eight years, and he was...
The blunt truth of the matter is that he was pushed
out by George Schrader, the city manager,
because, well, there are several sides to the
story, and I won't go into all that, but I will say
that George and the city council, as a matter of
fact, at that time, simply were not in sympathy
with what Wayman was trying to accomplish. I think
there was also a test of wills there and some other
things, but the long and the short of it is that the
city manager had the power to make conditions in
Dallas untenable for Wei Ming to remain. So he
left. And now went to the lower town, head up the
lower town redevelopment program in St. Paul and
was doing a bang-up job there, something I knew he
would do. Wei Ming had quite an influence, I think,
not only on the on Dallas planning. He certainly
had an influence on with regard to raising
expectations of what could actually be
accomplished in public environments. But he
also, I think, raised those level of expectations
in the state because he was truly a national
figure. And I think people in the profession
recognize that. Well, it seemed to me that I read in
one of the that at the time, the city of Dallas had
the largest number of dollars budgeted for urban
design of any city in the United States. I'm sure
that, well, I'm not sure. I'll take that as based
value being true. It's certainly possible,
because it was a very large budget, and Wei Ming had
brought a cadre of very skilled people in there,
and they were doing very good things. And it
certainly was a model for the rest of the state, at
least. Yeah. And I think in some respects, I think
it still is. I do not know, because I have not been
involved with planning education at all in Texas
since my commute to TCU back in 67, I guess it was, or
whatever that year I was there. Did you know Tom ?
Yes, I knew. Tom was a student of mine at NM. And he
has recently set up his own shop. I had heard that.
But he was with the department for years, and I
think always remained very interested in urban
design. I'm sure he was very supportive of leaving
the room. Oh, I know he was. Yeah, I know that's a
fact. In 1969, I really left professional life,
and have not gone back. and went into business.